---
title:  "Project 1: Database Design"
date:   2023-08-31 10:00:00 -0400
show_date: false
---
**Complete by: Friday 22 Sept., at class time.**  
*See the bottom of the file for additional checkpoints, all due at class time.*

*This prompt was written by Dr. Rapp and lightly adapted by me for our class.*

In this project, you will examine a real-world dataset and design a database to support it following the best-practices taught throughout the course. The provided dataset is adapted from the Western PA Regional Data Center’s release of the Toxic Release Inventory from Allegheny County; these results should be considered a reduced copy of what is mandated to be reported and monitored by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). We shall assume that the database you build will be used by local municipalities to monitor toxic releases within their counties and especially near school districts and parks.

Your first task is to normalize the dataset; you’ll create an Excel file, with one Sheet per table, that indicates all primary keys in bold and color coordinates the foreign key connections between the tables. You’ll then create a single README, or a PDF document to accompany a dataset which contains relevant details that all users are expected to read as a starting point. The README must contain a dependency diagram with all full functional dependencies indicated, a complete physical ERD documenting the normalized schema, a Data Dictionary which associates the column names with their relevant descriptions, and a reflective essay (1-2 pages) detailing your organizational choices and how they serve the way people will use this dataset. Your reflection will use the technical terms we define in class and should discuss the contributions others made to your choices. The README will also contain all citations and references.

You are expected to work on this project out of class until the due date of Friday, September 22. Recall from the syllabus that you are permitted to ask your classmates for help with this project provided you cite their contributions to your work; you are also encouraged to seek guidance from me or from the PAL tutors.

You may consider me to be your client for this project and the associated Project II. In an industry setting, you’ll be expected to communicate with your client during the development of your product; to help you practice this, along with the specific database design skills you’ll demonstrate, I have a few checkpoints to impose prior to the final due date. These are intended to help you make steady progress on the project, so that by the final deadline all your work will be polished and complete.

**This breakdown identifies all the important dates:**

- Wednesday, September 6: You will upload an in-progress Dependency Diagram as a photo through Sakai.
- Friday,September 8: You will upload an in-progress Excel file to Sakai to confirm navigational accessibility.
- Friday, September 15: You will upload an in-progress README as a PDF to Sakai to confirm formatting.
- Friday, September 22: A completed Excel file and README are submitted through Sakai.

**The following categories will be my criteria to evaluate this assignment on a 100-pt scale:**

- 35 pts: All relations are well-formed; data has been normalized following your dependency diagram.
- 35 pts: The schema you developed and its contents are well documented using a physical ERD.
- 30 pts: Data Dictionary and Reflection support the decisions documented in the Excel file and ERD.
