---
title:  "Project 2: Database Implementation"
date:   2023-09-25 10:00:00 -0400
show_date: false
---
**Complete by: Friday 27 Oct., at class time.**  
*See the bottom of the file for additional checkpoints, all due at class time.*

*This prompt was written by Dr. Rapp and lightly adapted by me for our class.*

In Project I, you organized a dataset and produced an ERD for that organization. In this project, you will transform your organization and roadmap into a fully functional database using PostgreSQL and Notepad++ (or a similar text-editor).

To ensure consistency across your databases, you will first obtain a copy of the ERD Dr. Ladd and Dr. Rapp built from this dataset. The version you obtain will not be the only correct way to organize this dataset, but it will be the roadmap of the data I will provide for large-scale querying during of this project. Your first task, then, will be to compare your Project I ERD to the class-uniform Project II ERD. You will write a brief essay (300 - 750 words) comparing your ERD to mine, and either arguing to defend your organization or making observations of where you could have improved your organization.

You will then build a complete schema, with full referential integrity, based on the class-uniform Project II ERD. Your code should follow the best practices of the class and follow the ERD exactly. You will be provided with a larger dataset to store in your functional database, and you will then be tasked with building 20 queries. Dr. Ladd will post the output of such queries; you will be expected to produce the exact output from your databases. You are expected to work on this project out of class until the due date of **Friday, Oct. 27**. Recall from the syllabus that you are not permitted to collaborate with your classmates for this project; you may seek guidance from me or the PAL tutors. For the purposes of this project, consider me to be your client and the PAL tutors to be your development team. You are developing this database for me, and to ensure timely completion I will require pieces of the project are required for submission before the final due date.

**Check-in dates:**

- Friday, October 6: Essay check-in, submitted *complete draft* as a PDF through Sakai; Required queries / output posted.
- Friday, October 13: DDL check-in, submitted as a .sql file through Sakai.
- Friday, October 20: DML check-in, submitted as a .sql file through Sakai.
- Friday, October 27: Final submission: all project files are submitted through Sakai for grading

**The following criteria will be followed to evaluate this assignment on a 100-pt scale:**

- 25 pts: Data Definition follows the ERD to produce a database with referential integrity.
- 50 pts: Data Manipulation effectively inserts/updates the data and builds the requested queries.
- 25 pts: Essay detailing the differences between your Project I work and the class provided ERD.
